src/content/blog/visuals-mcp-server.md, before:

---
author: Harald Binkle
pubDatetime: 2026-02-17T21:23:00Z
title: "Visuals MCP: Giving Your AI Agent a Face"
postSlug: visuals-mcp-server
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - MCP
  - VS Code
  - AI
  - GitHub Copilot
  - React
  - TypeScript
description: "Discover how to build an MCP App Server that provides rich UI components like tables and images to your AI agents."
---

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) has revolutionized how we connect our AI assistants to external tools and data. We're used to MCP servers that fetch files, query databases, or run commands. But what if your AI could do more than just stream text back at you? What if it could show you a sortable table, an interactive list, or a master-detail view of your data?

I built **[Visuals MCP](https://github.com/harrybin/visuals-mcp)** to solve exactly this problem. It's an MCP server designed to give your AI agent a "face" — a canvas to render rich, interactive React components directly within your editor.

## Why Text Isn't Enough

![Comparison of text-only output vs interactive app output](/assets/visuals-mcp/why-text-isnt-enough.svg)

Standard MCP servers are powerful, but they are often limited by the chat interface. If you ask an agent to "list all my active EC2 instances," it might dump a markdown table or a bulleted list.

- **Markdown tables are static.** You can't sort them by CPU usage or filter by region without asking the LLM to rewrite the whole thing.
- **Lists get long.** Scrolling through hundreds of lines of text is inefficient.
- **Images are links.** Usually, you get a file path or a URL, not a preview.

An **App MCP Server** (like Visuals MCP) changes this dynamic. Instead of returning text, the server returns a request to render a UI component. The host application (like VS Code or Claude Desktop) then renders that component, providing a native application-like experience.

## Building Visuals MCP

The `visuals-mcp` project is a TypeScript mono-repo that bundles a Node.js server with a React frontend. It leverages the `@modelcontextprotocol/sdk` to define tools that don't just return data, but return _instructions_ to render specific UI components.

### The Tech Stack

- **Core:** TypeScript & Node.js
- **Frontend:** React 19 & Vite
- **Styling:** Tailwind CSS
- **Components:** `@tanstack/react-table` for powerful data grids

### How It Works

![Data flow from user prompt through LLM and MCP server to rendered React app](/assets/visuals-mcp/how-it-works-flow.svg)

When you ask the agent to "show me a table of users," the flow looks like this:

1.  **User Prompt:** "List users in a table."
2.  **LLM Call:** The agent calls the `display_table` tool provided by the MCP server.
3.  **Server Response:** Instead of a text string of users, the server returns a JSON structure defining the table usage, including columns and data.
4.  **Client Render:** The host application receives this structure and renders the interactive React Table component.

This approach effectively decouples the _data retrieval_ from the _data presentation_, allowing the LLM to act as a controller for your UI.

### Deep Dive: Each Visual Is Its Own App

![Architecture diagram showing one app per visual with separate HTML entries, Vite builds, and server wiring](/assets/visuals-mcp/architecture-diagram.svg)

The key architectural insight behind Visuals MCP is that **every visual component is a standalone mini-application**. The table, the tree view, the list, the image preview, the master-detail layout — each one is an independent React app with its own HTML entry point, its own Vite build config, and its own bundled output.

#### The File Structure

At the repository root, you'll find a dedicated HTML file per visual:

```
mcp-table.html          → entry for the table app
mcp-tree.html           → entry for the tree app
mcp-list.html           → entry for the list app
mcp-image.html          → entry for the image app
mcp-master-detail.html  → entry for the master-detail app
```

Each HTML file is minimal. It just sets up a root `<div>` and loads the corresponding React entry point:

```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>MCP Table Display</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="root"></div>
    <script type="module" src="/src/table-app.tsx"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

That `table-app.tsx` file is the React entry point. It uses the `useApp` hook from `@modelcontextprotocol/ext-apps/react` to connect to the MCP host. This hook manages the lifecycle of the app, receives tool input data from the LLM, handles theme changes, and sends state updates back.

#### Separate Vite Builds

Each app gets its own Vite config (e.g. `vite.config.table.ts`). The magic ingredient is the `vite-plugin-singlefile` plugin, which bundles everything — JS, CSS, assets — into a **single self-contained HTML file**:

```typescript
import { defineConfig } from "vite";
import react from "@vitejs/plugin-react";
import { viteSingleFile } from "vite-plugin-singlefile";

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [react(), viteSingleFile()],
  build: {
    outDir: "dist",
    rollupOptions: {
      input: "./mcp-table.html",
    },
  },
});
```

The build script runs all five Vite builds in sequence:

```bash
npm run build:table && npm run build:image && \
npm run build:master-detail && npm run build:tree && npm run build:list
```

After the build, the `dist/` folder contains five self-contained HTML files, each a fully bundled React application.

#### How the Server Serves Apps

On the server side (`server.ts`), two things tie it all together.

**1. Tools with `resourceUri` metadata:** Each tool definition includes a `_meta.ui.resourceUri` property that points the host to the correct HTML resource:

```typescript
{
  name: "display_table",
  description: "Display an interactive table...",
  inputSchema: { /* columns, rows, title, etc. */ },
  _meta: {
    ui: {
      resourceUri: "table://display",
      visibility: ["model", "app"],
    },
  },
}
```

The `visibility: ["model", "app"]` means the tool is accessible both to the LLM (for calling it) and to the app (for receiving results).

**2. Resources that serve the HTML:** The server registers each app as an MCP resource. When the host requests `table://display`, the server reads the built single-file HTML from disk and returns it:

```typescript
server.setRequestHandler(ReadResourceRequestSchema, async request => {
  const { uri } = request.params;
  if (uri === "table://display") {
    const htmlPath = join(__dirname, "mcp-table.html");
    const htmlContent = readFileSync(htmlPath, "utf-8");
    return {
      contents: [{ uri, mimeType: "text/html", text: htmlContent }],
    };
  }
  // ... same pattern for image, tree, list, master-detail
});
```

#### The App Lifecycle

Inside each React app, the `useApp` hook from `@modelcontextprotocol/ext-apps` establishes bi-directional communication with the host:

```tsx
const { app } = useApp({
  appInfo: { name: "table-display", version: "1.0.0" },
  onAppCreated: createdApp => {
    // Receive data from the LLM tool call
    createdApp.ontoolinput = params => {
      setTableData(params.arguments);
    };
    // Adapt to the host's light/dark theme
    createdApp.onhostcontextchanged = ctx => {
      applyThemeMode(resolveThemeMode(ctx));
    };
  },
});
```

This means the app automatically receives the data the LLM passes through the tool call, renders it with a full React component, and adapts its appearance to match the host's current color theme.

## Features of Visuals MCP (Feb 2026)

Here is a glimpse of what `visuals-mcp` brings to the table (pun intended):

![Interactive Table showing data grid](/assets/visuals-mcp/table-example.png)

- **Interactive Tables:** Sort, filter, and paginate through data.

![Tree view showing hierarchical data](/assets/visuals-mcp/tree-example.png)

- **Tree Views:** Visualize hierarchical data like file systems or JSON objects.

![Master-Detail view with list on left and details on right](/assets/visuals-mcp/master-detail-example.png)

- **Master-Detail Views:** Browse a list on one side and see details on the other—perfect for reviewing logs or code snippets.

![Interactive list with checkboxes](/assets/visuals-mcp/list-example.png)

- **Interactive Lists:** Checkboxes and drag-and-drop reordering that can feed state back to the model.

- **Image Previews:** View local or remote images with metadata cards.

## Installation Options

![Two installation paths: NPM with manual config vs VS Code extension with zero config](/assets/visuals-mcp/installation-options.svg)

One of the great things about the MCP ecosystem is the flexibility in installation. These methods apply not just to `visuals-mcp`, but to almost any MCP server you might want to use.

### 1. The Power-User Way: NPM (Generic)

You can run any MCP server using `npx` or by installing it globally. This works for both VS Code and Claude Desktop.

**For VS Code (`settings.json`):**

```json
{
  "github.copilot.chat.mcpServers": {
    "visuals-mcp": {
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@harrybin/visuals-mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

**For Claude Desktop (`claude_desktop_config.json`):**

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "visuals-mcp": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@harrybin/visuals-mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### 2. The Easy Way: VS Code Extension

For `visuals-mcp` specifically, I've wrapped it as a **VS Code Extension**. This is by far the easiest way to get started.

- Open the VS Code Marketplace.
- Search for **"Visuals MCP"**.
- Install it.

That's it! The extension automatically registers the MCP server with GitHub Copilot Chat. You don't need to touch any JSON configuration files. This "server-as-extension" model is a game-changer for adoption, making advanced AI tools accessible to everyone.

## Conclusion

The Model Context Protocol is evolving. We are moving from simple text exchanges to rich, interactive application experiences driven by AI. Whether you want to build your own or just use existing tools, now is the time to explore what MCP can do.

Give [Visuals MCP](https://github.com/harrybin/visuals-mcp) a try and let your agent show you what it really means.

Commit message:

feat: add installation buttons for VS Code and VS Code Insiders in Visuals MCP blog post

src/content/blog/visuals-mcp-server.md, after:

---
author: Harald Binkle
pubDatetime: 2026-02-17T21:23:00Z
title: "Visuals MCP: Giving Your AI Agent a Face"
postSlug: visuals-mcp-server
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - MCP
  - VS Code
  - AI
  - GitHub Copilot
  - React
  - TypeScript
description: "Discover how to build an MCP App Server that provides rich UI components like tables and images to your AI agents."
---

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) has revolutionized how we connect our AI assistants to external tools and data. We're used to MCP servers that fetch files, query databases, or run commands. But what if your AI could do more than just stream text back at you? What if it could show you a sortable table, an interactive list, or a master-detail view of your data?

I built **[Visuals MCP](https://github.com/harrybin/visuals-mcp)** to solve exactly this problem. It's an MCP server designed to give your AI agent a "face" — a canvas to render rich, interactive React components directly within your editor.

## Why Text Isn't Enough

![Comparison of text-only output vs interactive app output](/assets/visuals-mcp/why-text-isnt-enough.svg)

Standard MCP servers are powerful, but they are often limited by the chat interface. If you ask an agent to "list all my active EC2 instances," it might dump a markdown table or a bulleted list.

- **Markdown tables are static.** You can't sort them by CPU usage or filter by region without asking the LLM to rewrite the whole thing.
- **Lists get long.** Scrolling through hundreds of lines of text is inefficient.
- **Images are links.** Usually, you get a file path or a URL, not a preview.

An **App MCP Server** (like Visuals MCP) changes this dynamic. Instead of returning text, the server returns a request to render a UI component. The host application (like VS Code or Claude Desktop) then renders that component, providing a native application-like experience.

## Building Visuals MCP

The `visuals-mcp` project is a TypeScript mono-repo that bundles a Node.js server with a React frontend. It leverages the `@modelcontextprotocol/sdk` to define tools that don't just return data, but return _instructions_ to render specific UI components.

### The Tech Stack

- **Core:** TypeScript & Node.js
- **Frontend:** React 19 & Vite
- **Styling:** Tailwind CSS
- **Components:** `@tanstack/react-table` for powerful data grids

### How It Works

![Data flow from user prompt through LLM and MCP server to rendered React app](/assets/visuals-mcp/how-it-works-flow.svg)

When you ask the agent to "show me a table of users," the flow looks like this:

1.  **User Prompt:** "List users in a table."
2.  **LLM Call:** The agent calls the `display_table` tool provided by the MCP server.
3.  **Server Response:** Instead of a text string of users, the server returns a JSON structure defining the table usage, including columns and data.
4.  **Client Render:** The host application receives this structure and renders the interactive React Table component.

This approach effectively decouples the _data retrieval_ from the _data presentation_, allowing the LLM to act as a controller for your UI.

### Deep Dive: Each Visual Is Its Own App

![Architecture diagram showing one app per visual with separate HTML entries, Vite builds, and server wiring](/assets/visuals-mcp/architecture-diagram.svg)

The key architectural insight behind Visuals MCP is that **every visual component is a standalone mini-application**. The table, the tree view, the list, the image preview, the master-detail layout — each one is an independent React app with its own HTML entry point, its own Vite build config, and its own bundled output.

#### The File Structure

At the repository root, you'll find a dedicated HTML file per visual:

```
mcp-table.html          → entry for the table app
mcp-tree.html           → entry for the tree app
mcp-list.html           → entry for the list app
mcp-image.html          → entry for the image app
mcp-master-detail.html  → entry for the master-detail app
```

Each HTML file is minimal. It just sets up a root `<div>` and loads the corresponding React entry point:

```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
    <title>MCP Table Display</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="root"></div>
    <script type="module" src="/src/table-app.tsx"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

That `table-app.tsx` file is the React entry point. It uses the `useApp` hook from `@modelcontextprotocol/ext-apps/react` to connect to the MCP host. This hook manages the lifecycle of the app, receives tool input data from the LLM, handles theme changes, and sends state updates back.

#### Separate Vite Builds

Each app gets its own Vite config (e.g. `vite.config.table.ts`). The magic ingredient is the `vite-plugin-singlefile` plugin, which bundles everything — JS, CSS, assets — into a **single self-contained HTML file**:

```typescript
import { defineConfig } from "vite";
import react from "@vitejs/plugin-react";
import { viteSingleFile } from "vite-plugin-singlefile";

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [react(), viteSingleFile()],
  build: {
    outDir: "dist",
    rollupOptions: {
      input: "./mcp-table.html",
    },
  },
});
```

The build script runs all five Vite builds in sequence:

```bash
npm run build:table && npm run build:image && \
npm run build:master-detail && npm run build:tree && npm run build:list
```

After the build, the `dist/` folder contains five self-contained HTML files, each a fully bundled React application.

#### How the Server Serves Apps

On the server side (`server.ts`), two things tie it all together.

**1. Tools with `resourceUri` metadata:** Each tool definition includes a `_meta.ui.resourceUri` property that points the host to the correct HTML resource:

```typescript
{
  name: "display_table",
  description: "Display an interactive table...",
  inputSchema: { /* columns, rows, title, etc. */ },
  _meta: {
    ui: {
      resourceUri: "table://display",
      visibility: ["model", "app"],
    },
  },
}
```

The `visibility: ["model", "app"]` means the tool is accessible both to the LLM (for calling it) and to the app (for receiving results).

**2. Resources that serve the HTML:** The server registers each app as an MCP resource. When the host requests `table://display`, the server reads the built single-file HTML from disk and returns it:

```typescript
server.setRequestHandler(ReadResourceRequestSchema, async request => {
  const { uri } = request.params;
  if (uri === "table://display") {
    const htmlPath = join(__dirname, "mcp-table.html");
    const htmlContent = readFileSync(htmlPath, "utf-8");
    return {
      contents: [{ uri, mimeType: "text/html", text: htmlContent }],
    };
  }
  // ... same pattern for image, tree, list, master-detail
});
```

#### The App Lifecycle

Inside each React app, the `useApp` hook from `@modelcontextprotocol/ext-apps` establishes bi-directional communication with the host:

```tsx
const { app } = useApp({
  appInfo: { name: "table-display", version: "1.0.0" },
  onAppCreated: createdApp => {
    // Receive data from the LLM tool call
    createdApp.ontoolinput = params => {
      setTableData(params.arguments);
    };
    // Adapt to the host's light/dark theme
    createdApp.onhostcontextchanged = ctx => {
      applyThemeMode(resolveThemeMode(ctx));
    };
  },
});
```

This means the app automatically receives the data the LLM passes through the tool call, renders it with a full React component, and adapts its appearance to match the host's current color theme.

## Features of Visuals MCP (Feb 2026)

Here is a glimpse of what `visuals-mcp` brings to the table (pun intended):

![Interactive Table showing data grid](/assets/visuals-mcp/table-example.png)

- **Interactive Tables:** Sort, filter, and paginate through data.

![Tree view showing hierarchical data](/assets/visuals-mcp/tree-example.png)

- **Tree Views:** Visualize hierarchical data like file systems or JSON objects.

![Master-Detail view with list on left and details on right](/assets/visuals-mcp/master-detail-example.png)

- **Master-Detail Views:** Browse a list on one side and see details on the other—perfect for reviewing logs or code snippets.

![Interactive list with checkboxes](/assets/visuals-mcp/list-example.png)

- **Interactive Lists:** Checkboxes and drag-and-drop reordering that can feed state back to the model.

- **Image Previews:** View local or remote images with metadata cards.

## Installation Options

![Two installation paths: NPM with manual config vs VS Code extension with zero config](/assets/visuals-mcp/installation-options.svg)

One of the great things about the MCP ecosystem is the flexibility in installation. These methods apply not just to `visuals-mcp`, but to almost any MCP server you might want to use.

### 1. The Power-User Way: NPM (Generic)

You can run any MCP server using `npx` or by installing it globally. This works for both VS Code and Claude Desktop.

**For VS Code (`settings.json`):**

```json
{
  "github.copilot.chat.mcpServers": {
    "visuals-mcp": {
      "type": "stdio",
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@harrybin/visuals-mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

**For Claude Desktop (`claude_desktop_config.json`):**

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "visuals-mcp": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@harrybin/visuals-mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### 2. The Easy Way: VS Code Extension

For `visuals-mcp` specifically, I've wrapped it as a **VS Code Extension**. This is by far the easiest way to get started.

- Open the VS Code Marketplace.
- Search for **"Visuals MCP"**.
- Install it.

That's it! The extension automatically registers the MCP server with GitHub Copilot Chat. You don't need to touch any JSON configuration files. This "server-as-extension" model is a game-changer for adoption, making advanced AI tools accessible to everyone.

Alternatively you can install the extension using these buttons:
[![Install with VS Code](https://img.shields.io/badge/install-VS%20Code-007ACC?style=for-the-badge&logo=visualstudiocode)](vscode:mcp/install?%7B%22type%22%3A%22stdio%22%2C%22command%22%3A%22npx%22%2C%22args%22%3A%5B%22%40harrybin%2Fvisuals-mcp%22%5D%7D)
°°° [![Install with VS Code Insiders](https://img.shields.io/badge/install-VS%20Code%20Insiders-24bfa5?style=for-the-badge&logo=visualstudiocode)](vscode-insiders:mcp/install?%7B%22type%22%3A%22stdio%22%2C%22command%22%3A%22npx%22%2C%22args%22%3A%5B%22%40harrybin%2Fvisuals-mcp%22%5D%7D)

## Conclusion

The Model Context Protocol is evolving. We are moving from simple text exchanges to rich, interactive application experiences driven by AI. Whether you want to build your own or just use existing tools, now is the time to explore what MCP can do.

Give [Visuals MCP](https://github.com/harrybin/visuals-mcp) a try and let your agent show you what it really means.
